README.md, before:

# Nabladown.js 

A parser and renderer for the `Nabladown` language.

NablaDown.js is a `JS` library able to `parse: String -> Abstract Syntax Tree` a pseudo/flavored **Markdown** language and `render: Abstract Syntax Tree -> HTML` it into `HTML`.

The purpose of this library is to render beautiful documents in `HTML`, using a simple language as **Markdown**, with the focus of rendering `code`,`equations`,`html` and `custom behavior`.

The library is written in a way, that is possible to create and compose multiple renderers together. This way is possible to add features on top of a basic renderer. More on that below.

# Contents

2. [QuickStart](#import)
1. [Language cheat sheet](#language-cheat-sheet)
3. [Usage](#usage)
4. [Extending basic renderer](#extending-basic-renderer)
5. [Building yourself](#building-yourself)
6. [TODO](#todo)

# Language cheat sheet

This language follows the basic [markdown syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) but adds some extras like formulas, code, and HTML.

## Headers

```js
# H1
## H2
### H3
...
###### H6
```

## Style

```js
_italics_

**bold**

**_bold and italics_**

_**italics and bold**_
```

## Paragraph

```js
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum // paragraph

lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum.
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum lorem ipsum lorem ipsum // paragraph

lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum.
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. // paragraph
```

## Lists

### Unordered

```js
- Parent
 - Child
  - GrandChild
  - GrandChild
 - Child
```

### Ordered

```js
// numbers don't really matter,
// they just need to be numbers
1. Parent
 2. Child
  3. GrandChild
  3. GrandChild
 8. Child
```

### Mixed type

```js
1. Ordered Parent
 - Unordered Child
 - Unordered Child
 - Unordered Child
2. Ordered Parent
 - Unordered Child
 - Unordered Child
```

> Lists children indentation is done with a single space only (for now, at least).

> For now, nabladown is not able to write paragraphs in lists. Like [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#paragraphs).


## Links

```js
// simple link
[nabladown.js](https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/)

// link with title
[brave](https://search.brave.com/)

// link using reference
[brave][ref]

Some optional text...

[ref]: https://search.brave.com/
```

It is also possible to link to headers

```markdown
[Go to title](#a-title)
```

## Footnotes

```js
Some optional text [^1]
blablabla [^foot] blablabla

...

[^1]: Text with **nabladown** syntax
[^foot]: You can use any identifier
```

> For now, it's not possible to add paragraphs in footnotes, like [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#footnotes)

## Images/Videos

```js
// simple image
![Image legend](https://picsum.photos/200)

// image with title
![Image _legend_  and **title**](https://picsum.photos/200)

// Image with link to it
[![Image reference + Link][link_variable]][link_variable]

[link_variable]: some link to image

// image with size =widthxheight
![](https://picsum.photos/200/300 =200x300)

// image using reference
![][ref]

Some optional text...

[ref]: some_url 


// youtube video with legend
![**Gradient** youtube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIpKfDc295M)

// video with size =widthxheight
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIpKfDc295M =200x300)

// video
![Free **video**](https://archive.org/download/BigBuckBunny_124/Content/big_buck_bunny_720p_surround.mp4)

// sound
![Free *sound*](https://www.bensound.com/bensound-music/bensound-ukulele.mp3)
```

When embedding youtube videos, it uses the private option in [`youtube-nocookie.com`](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/171780?hl=en#zippy=%2Cturn-on-privacy-enhanced-mode).

## Math

Use [Tex](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Mathematics) syntax inside '$'.

```js
// inline
Lorem ipsum $x^2+1 = 0$

// paragraph
$$e^{2\pi i} - 1 = 0$$

// paragraph
$$
\oint_{\partial\Omega} \alpha = \ int_\Omega \text{d} \alpha
$$
```

## Code

### Inline code

```js
lorem ipsum `inline code here` lorem ipsum
```

### Block code

````
```java
class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello")
  }
}
```
````
In the abstract

````
```<language>

block code...

```
````

Syntax [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#fenced-code-blocks).
Name of the available languages according to [highlight.js](https://github.com/highlightjs/highlight.js/blob/main/SUPPORTED_LANGUAGES.md)

## HTML

```html
# Normal markdown with <span style="color: red"> red text </span> inline

A paragraph with html and nabladown inside:
<div>
<a href="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js">
    $1 + 1 = 2$
</a>
<button onClick="alert('hello world')">
  hello **world**
</button>
</div>
```

## Custom

```
[quote]:::

lorem *ipsum* $\dot x = -\nabla V $!

:::

// generates div with class=quote while rendering nabladown inside
```

Plugins could be added here in a custom render, check [custom render](#extending-basic-renderer) section.

## Line Separation

```js
lorem ipsum 

---

lorem ipsum

```


# Import

This library exports:

- Parser.js
- Render.js (vanilla render)
- MathRender.js (vanilla + math)
- CodeRender.js (vanilla + code)
- NablaRender.js (vanilla + math + code)

And you can import these via:

## Via [HTML](https://jsfiddle.net/a0qponvt/)

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Parser.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Render.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/MathRender.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/CodeRender.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body style="color:black"></body>
  <script>
    const { parse } = Parser;
    const { render } = Render;
    const { render: mathRender } = MathRender;
    const { render: codeRender } = CodeRender;
    const { render: nablaRender } = NabladownRender;
    // append basic rendering
    document.body.appendChild(render(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n")));
    // append code rendering
    document.body.appendChild(
      codeRender(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n"))
    );
    // append math rendering
    document.body.appendChild(
      mathRender(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n"))
    );
    // append nabladown rendering
    document.body.appendChild(
      nablaRender(parse("# $\\nabla$ Nabladown`.js` \n"))
    );
  </script>
</html>
```

## Using Bundlers(Webpack, ...)

```js
 npm i --save pedroth/nabladown.js

 // index.js
import { parse } from "nabladown.js/dist/Parser"
import { render } from "nabladown.js/dist/Render"
import { render as codeRender } from "nabladown.js/dist/CodeRender"
import { render as mathRender } from "nabladown.js/dist/MathRender"
import { render as nabladownRender } from "nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender"
```

## Via npm to node [unstable]

```js
 npm i --save pedroth/nabladown.js

// index.js
const { parse } = require("nabladown.js/dist/Parser.node")
const { render } = require("nabladown.js/dist/Render.node")
const { render: nabladownRender } = require("nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.node")
```

# Usage

Nabladown.js provides two functions:

- `parse: String -> Tree`
- `render: Tree -> HTML`

The `parser` will produce a [Abstract Synatx Tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree) from a `string`, and `render` will create `HTML nodes` from the parsing tree.

## Usage with Bundlers

```js

import { parse } from "nabladown.js/dist/Parser"
import { render } from "nabladown.js/dist/Render"

document.body.appendChild(render(parse("#$\\nabla$Nabladown\`.js\`\n"))
```

## Usage with HTML

Check [this jsfiddle](https://jsfiddle.net/a0qponvt/) code snippet.
Or simply check out the [index.js](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/index.js) of nabladown.js webpage.

# Extending basic renderer

It is possible to extend the basic renderer, to build a custom one. There are a few ways of doing this:

- Adding style to HTML components using regular CSS.
- Extending `Render class` from [Render.js](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/Render.js)

The [CodeRender class](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/CodeRender.js) is an example of extending the `Render class`, where code highlight was implemented.

The [MathRender class](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/MathRender.js) is an example of extending the `Render class`, where code highlight was implemented.

You can also combine multiple renderers together using `composeRender` function. Check[NabladownRender class](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/NabladownRender.js) for an example of that.

## Changing CSS

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Parser.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Render.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.js"></script>
    <style>
      body {
        background-color: #212121;
        color: white;
      }

      body h1 {
        text-decoration: underline;
      }

      body code {
        border-style: solid;
        border-width: thin;
        border-radius: 6px;
        box-sizing: border-box;
        background-color: #000000;
        border: hidden;
        font-size: 85%;
        padding: 0.2em 0.4em;
        color: orange;
      }
    </style>
  </head>
  <body></body>
  <script>
    const { parse } = Parser;
    const { render } = NabladownRender;
    // append basic rendering
    document.body.appendChild(render(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n")));
  </script>
</html>
```

Code snippet [here](https://jsfiddle.net/max0q15y/1/)

## Extending NabladownRender class

Let's change color of the header elements based on their level:

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Parser.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body></body>
  <script>
    const { parse } = Parser;
    const { Render } = NabladownRender;
    class CustomRender extends Render {
      /**
       * title => HTML
       * @param {*} title
       */
      renderTitle(title) {
        const colors = ["red", "orange", "yellow", "green", "blue", "purple"];
        const { level, Seq } = title;
        const header = super.renderTitle(title);
        header.setAttribute("style", `color:${colors[level - 1]}`);
        return header;
      }
    }

    const render = syntaxTree => new CustomRender().render(syntaxTree);
    const text = `# $ \\nabla$Nabladown.js \n#### $ \\nabla$Nabladown.js \n#####$ \\nabla$Nabladown.js \n`;
    // append custom rendering
    document.body.appendChild(render(parse(text)));
  </script>
</html>
```

Code snippet [here](https://jsfiddle.net/wd5bvey8/1/). For more details, you need to dig the source code :D

# Building yourself

Clone or fork repo, then run:

- `npm ci`
- `npm run build`


# TODO

1. Optimize html generation
 - Remove unnecessary spans, divs, etc.
2. Add dialog in images (expanding images in cell phone)
3. Add multi-line paragraps in lists and footnotes
2. Add images with custom sizes (?)
3. Add multiple indentations in lists
3. Add mathML(dependency free) into formulas of the vanilla render (now is using katex) 
3. Add `quotes >` to be fully compatible with Markdown (low priority)

Commit message:

use either instead of sucess/fail in lazy domBuilder, Add node library Changed copy icon Still have bugs on code generation in nodejs, need to wait for reading css files

README.md, after:

# Nabladown.js 

A parser and renderer for the `Nabladown` language.

NablaDown.js is a `JS` library able to `parse: String -> Abstract Syntax Tree` a pseudo/flavored **Markdown** language and `render: Abstract Syntax Tree -> HTML` it into `HTML`.

The purpose of this library is to render beautiful documents in `HTML`, using a simple language as **Markdown**, with the focus of rendering `code`,`equations`,`html` and `custom behavior`.

The library is written in a way, that is possible to create and compose multiple renderers together. This way is possible to add features on top of a basic renderer. More on that below.

# Contents

2. [QuickStart](#import)
1. [Language cheat sheet](#language-cheat-sheet)
3. [Usage](#usage)
4. [Extending basic renderer](#extending-basic-renderer)
5. [Building yourself](#building-yourself)
6. [TODO](#todo)

# Language cheat sheet

This language follows the basic [markdown syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) but adds some extras like formulas, code, and HTML.

## Headers

```js
# H1
## H2
### H3
...
###### H6
```

## Style

```js
_italics_

**bold**

**_bold and italics_**

_**italics and bold**_
```

## Paragraph

```js
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum // paragraph

lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum.
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum lorem ipsum lorem ipsum // paragraph

lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. lorem ipsum lorem ipsum.
lorem ipsum lorem ipsum. // paragraph
```

## Lists

### Unordered

```js
- Parent
 - Child
  - GrandChild
  - GrandChild
 - Child
```

### Ordered

```js
// numbers don't really matter,
// they just need to be numbers
1. Parent
 2. Child
  3. GrandChild
  3. GrandChild
 8. Child
```

### Mixed type

```js
1. Ordered Parent
 - Unordered Child
 - Unordered Child
 - Unordered Child
2. Ordered Parent
 - Unordered Child
 - Unordered Child
```

> Lists children indentation is done with a single space only (for now, at least).

> For now, nabladown is not able to write paragraphs in lists. Like [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#paragraphs).


## Links

```js
// simple link
[nabladown.js](https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/)

// link with title
[brave](https://search.brave.com/)

// link using reference
[brave][ref]

Some optional text...

[ref]: https://search.brave.com/
```

It is also possible to link to headers

```markdown
[Go to title](#a-title)
```

## Footnotes

```js
Some optional text [^1]
blablabla [^foot] blablabla

...

[^1]: Text with **nabladown** syntax
[^foot]: You can use any identifier
```

> For now, it's not possible to add paragraphs in footnotes, like [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#footnotes)

## Images/Videos

```js
// simple image
![Image legend](https://picsum.photos/200)

// image with title
![Image _legend_  and **title**](https://picsum.photos/200)

// Image with link to it
[![Image reference + Link][link_variable]][link_variable]

[link_variable]: some link to image

// image with size =widthxheight
![](https://picsum.photos/200/300 =200x300)

// image using reference
![][ref]

Some optional text...

[ref]: some_url 


// youtube video with legend
![**Gradient** youtube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIpKfDc295M)

// video with size =widthxheight
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIpKfDc295M =200x300)

// video
![Free **video**](https://archive.org/download/BigBuckBunny_124/Content/big_buck_bunny_720p_surround.mp4)

// sound
![Free *sound*](https://www.bensound.com/bensound-music/bensound-ukulele.mp3)
```

When embedding youtube videos, it uses the private option in [`youtube-nocookie.com`](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/171780?hl=en#zippy=%2Cturn-on-privacy-enhanced-mode).

## Math

Use [Tex](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Mathematics) syntax inside '$'.

```js
// inline
Lorem ipsum $x^2+1 = 0$

// paragraph
$$e^{2\pi i} - 1 = 0$$

// paragraph
$$
\oint_{\partial\Omega} \alpha = \ int_\Omega \text{d} \alpha
$$
```

## Code

### Inline code

```js
lorem ipsum `inline code here` lorem ipsum
```

### Block code

````
```java
class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello")
  }
}
```
````
In the abstract

````
```<language>

block code...

```
````

Syntax [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#fenced-code-blocks).
Name of the available languages according to [highlight.js](https://github.com/highlightjs/highlight.js/blob/main/SUPPORTED_LANGUAGES.md)

## HTML

```html
# Normal markdown with <span style="color: red"> red text </span> inline

A paragraph with html and nabladown inside:
<div>
<a href="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js">
    $1 + 1 = 2$
</a>
<button onClick="alert('hello world')">
  hello **world**
</button>
</div>
```

## Custom

```
[quote]:::

lorem *ipsum* $\dot x = -\nabla V $!

:::

// generates div with class=quote while rendering nabladown inside
```

Plugins could be added here in a custom render, check [custom render](#extending-basic-renderer) section.

## Line Separation

```js
lorem ipsum 

---

lorem ipsum

```


# Import

This library exports:

- Parser.js
- Render.js (vanilla render)
- MathRender.js (vanilla + math)
- CodeRender.js (vanilla + code)
- NablaRender.js (vanilla + math + code)

And you can import these via:

## Via [HTML](https://jsfiddle.net/a0qponvt/)

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Parser.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Render.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/MathRender.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/CodeRender.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body style="color:black"></body>
  <script>
    const { parse } = Parser;
    const { render } = Render;
    const { render: mathRender } = MathRender;
    const { render: codeRender } = CodeRender;
    const { render: nablaRender } = NabladownRender;
    // append basic rendering
    document.body.appendChild(render(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n")));
    // append code rendering
    document.body.appendChild(
      codeRender(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n"))
    );
    // append math rendering
    document.body.appendChild(
      mathRender(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n"))
    );
    // append nabladown rendering
    document.body.appendChild(
      nablaRender(parse("# $\\nabla$ Nabladown`.js` \n"))
    );
  </script>
</html>
```

## Using Bundlers(Webpack, ...)

```js
 npm i --save pedroth/nabladown.js

 // index.js
import { parse } from "nabladown.js/dist/Parser"
import { render } from "nabladown.js/dist/Render"
import { render as codeRender } from "nabladown.js/dist/CodeRender"
import { render as mathRender } from "nabladown.js/dist/MathRender"
import { render as nabladownRender } from "nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender"
```

## Via npm to node [unstable]

```js
 npm i --save pedroth/nabladown.js

// index.js
const { parse } = require("nabladown.js/dist/Parser.node")
const { render } = require("nabladown.js/dist/Render.node")
const { render: nabladownRender } = require("nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.node")
```

# Usage

Nabladown.js provides two functions:

- `parse: String -> Tree`
- `render: Tree -> HTML`

The `parser` will produce a [Abstract Synatx Tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree) from a `string`, and `render` will create `HTML nodes` from the parsing tree.

## Usage with Bundlers

```js

import { parse } from "nabladown.js/dist/Parser"
import { render } from "nabladown.js/dist/Render"

document.body.appendChild(render(parse("#$\\nabla$Nabladown\`.js\`\n"))
```

## Usage with HTML

Check [this jsfiddle](https://jsfiddle.net/a0qponvt/) code snippet.
Or simply check out the [index.js](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/index.js) of nabladown.js webpage.

# Extending basic renderer

It is possible to extend the basic renderer, to build a custom one. There are a few ways of doing this:

- Adding style to HTML components using regular CSS.
- Extending `Render class` from [Render.js](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/Render.js)

The [CodeRender class](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/CodeRender.js) is an example of extending the `Render class`, where code highlight was implemented.

The [MathRender class](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/MathRender.js) is an example of extending the `Render class`, where code highlight was implemented.

You can also combine multiple renderers together using `composeRender` function. Check[NabladownRender class](https://github.com/pedroth/nabladown.js/blob/main/src/NabladownRender.js) for an example of that.

## Changing CSS

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Parser.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Render.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.js"></script>
    <style>
      body {
        background-color: #212121;
        color: white;
      }

      body h1 {
        text-decoration: underline;
      }

      body code {
        border-style: solid;
        border-width: thin;
        border-radius: 6px;
        box-sizing: border-box;
        background-color: #000000;
        border: hidden;
        font-size: 85%;
        padding: 0.2em 0.4em;
        color: orange;
      }
    </style>
  </head>
  <body></body>
  <script>
    const { parse } = Parser;
    const { render } = NabladownRender;
    // append basic rendering
    document.body.appendChild(render(parse("# $ \\nabla $ Nabladown`.js` \n")));
  </script>
</html>
```

Code snippet [here](https://jsfiddle.net/max0q15y/1/)

## Extending NabladownRender class

Let's change color of the header elements based on their level:

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/Parser.js"></script>
    <script src="https://pedroth.github.io/nabladown.js/dist/NabladownRender.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body></body>
  <script>
    const { parse } = Parser;
    const { Render } = NabladownRender;
    class CustomRender extends Render {
      /**
       * title => HTML
       * @param {*} title
       */
      renderTitle(title) {
        const colors = ["red", "orange", "yellow", "green", "blue", "purple"];
        const { level, Seq } = title;
        const header = super.renderTitle(title);
        header.setAttribute("style", `color:${colors[level - 1]}`);
        return header;
      }
    }

    const render = syntaxTree => new CustomRender().render(syntaxTree);
    const text = `# $ \\nabla$Nabladown.js \n#### $ \\nabla$Nabladown.js \n#####$ \\nabla$Nabladown.js \n`;
    // append custom rendering
    document.body.appendChild(render(parse(text)));
  </script>
</html>
```

Code snippet [here](https://jsfiddle.net/wd5bvey8/1/). For more details, you need to dig the source code :D

# Building yourself

Clone or fork repo, then run:

- `npm ci`
- `npm run build`


# TODO

1. Optimize html generation
 - Remove unnecessary spans, divs, etc.
2. Total compatibility between nodejs and browser rendering.
2. Add dialog in images (expanding images in cell phone)
3. Add multi-line paragraps in lists and footnotes
3. Add multiple types of indentations in lists
2. Add images with custom sizes (?)
3. Use local katex style instead of online one 
3. Add `quotes >` to be compatible with Markdown (low priority)
